2_autoloading_part_2.md, before:

# PHP RFC: Function Autoloading 

  * Version: 0.5
  * Date: 2020-05-09
  * Author: Danack, based on work Anthony Ferrara
  * Status: Draft
  * First Published at: 

## Introduction 

This RFC proposes a new unified autoloading mechanism to allow autoloading of class types (which includes classes, interfaces and traits), callable types, and functions. Currently only class type autoloading is possible in PHP

## Example

This example shows a separate autoloader being registered for classes, 

```php

<?php

use function PHP\autoload_register;
use const PHP\AUTOLOAD_TYPE;
use const PHP\AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION;


function classTypeAutoloader($name, $type)
{
    if ($type !== AUTOLOAD_TYPE) {
        return;
    }
    if ($name !== 'foo') {
        return;
    }

    // Being able to define classes inside a function
    // already exists in PHP and is convenient for an example 
    class foo
    {
        public function __construct()
        {
            echo "class was created";
        } 
    }
}

function functionAutoloader($name, $type)
{
    if ($type !== AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION) {
        return;
    }
    if ($name !== 'foo') {
        return;
    }
    function foo() {
        echo "foo was called";
    }
}

function callableTypeAutoloader($name, $type)
{
    if ($type !== AUTOLOAD_TYPE) {
        return;
    }
    if ($name !== 'logger') {
        return;
    }

    typedef logger = callable(string $message): void;
}

autoload_register('classTypeAutoloader', AUTOLOAD_TYPE);
autoload_register('callableTypeAutoloader', AUTOLOAD_TYPE);
autoload_register('functionAutoloader', AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION);

// As is currently possible, trigger class autoload 
new Foo();
//output: class was created

// The triggers the capability to autoload a function 
foo();
// output: function was autoloaded and called


// Define a function that uses a callable type for a paramter
// This does not trigger an autoload event. The autoloading happens
// When the function is called.
function usesCallableType(logger $logger)
{
    $logger("usesCallableType was called");
}

$echoLogger = function (string $message)
{
    echo $message . "\n";
};

// When this function is dispatched, it is during the type  
// checking that the 'logger' callable type is autoloaded
usesCallableType($echoLogger);

```

## Implementation details

### Constants 

This proposal registers the following constants:

  * PHP\AUTOLOAD_TYPE => 1
  * PHP\AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION => 2


The `AUTOLOAD_TYPE` is used for registering autoloaders for all the different types, which will be classes and callable types.

The `AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION` is used for registering autoloading for functions.


### Userland Functions 

This proposal adds the following functions:

#### bool php\autoload_register(callable $callback, int $type, bool $prepend) 


#### bool php\autoload_unregister(callable $callback, int $type) 

This function behaves similar to the current //spl_autoload_unregister// function, and unregisters a callback that was previously registered. Note that if you registered the same callback for multiple types, this will unregister all of them unless the //$type// argument is specified.

#### array php\autoload_list(int $type) 

This function will return a list of all registered autoloaders for a specific type.

#### function_exists() 

A new optional boolean argument is added to `function_exists()` to match the behavior of `class_exists()` when it comes to autoloading functions.

TODO - an optional argument seems sub-optimal. Should we simply add a new function that does function_load() ?

### Behavior 

Registering autoloaders with the new API will allow callbacks to be fired on type and function missing errors.

#### Single Type Behavior 

By passing a single constant to the register function, the callback will only be called for types that match (the `$type` parameter is still set, but will never vary).

<file php single_type.php>
<?php
php\autoload_register(function($name, $type) {
    var_dump($name, $type);
    eval("function $name(){}");
    // We don't need a switch, since we only register for functions.
}, php\AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION);
foo(); // string(3) "foo" int(2)
new foo(); // FATAL_ERROR as no autoloader is registered
?>
</file>

#### Multiple Type Behavior 

By passing a bitwise-or'd constant to the register function, the callback will only be called for types that match).

<file php multiple_type.php>
<?php
php\autoload_register(function($name, $type) {
    var_dump($name, $type);
    switch ($type) {
        case php\AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION:
            eval("function $name(){}");
            break;
        case php\AUTOLOAD_TYPE:
            $code = <<< CODE
            class $name
                {
                    public function __construct()
                    {
                        echo "class $name was created";
                    } 
                }
CODE;
            eval($code);
            break;
    }
}, php\AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION | php\AUTOLOAD_TYPE);
foo(); // string(3) "foo" int(2)
new foo();
?>
</file>


### Userland Backwards Compatibility 

#### SPL 

This RFC proposes to strip the current //spl_autoload_register// functionality, and make //spl_autoload_*// simple proxies for registering core autoloaders. They will function exactly as they do now, but under the hood they will be using the new interface.

This means that calls to //spl_autoload_functions()// will include any autoloader (which indicates support for //php\AUTOLOAD_TYPE//) registered through //php\autoload_register()//. However, all autoloaders registered via //spl_autoload_register// will set the //pass_type// flag to //0//, meaning that only a single argument will be passed to the callback. This is for compatiblity.


### C API Backwards Compatibility 

#### SPL 

The autoload related SPL globals have been removed, due to the implementation being centralized.

## Backward Incompatible Changes 

### Userland 

There should be no user-land BC changes.

### PECL 

#### EG(autoload_func) 

PECL extensions which rely on the //EG(autoload_func)// global variable will break (due to refactor).

A quick scan of LXR shows that only the [optimizer](http://lxr.php.net/xref/PECL/optimizer/optimize.c#4660) extension would change.

#### autoload_func_info 

PECL extensions which reply on the SPL type //autoload_func_info// will break (due to refactor).

A quick scan of LXR shows that no extensions use this.

#### SPL_G(autoload_functions) 

PECL extensions which rely on the SPL globals will break (due to refactor).

A quick scan of LXR shows that no extensions use this.

## Proposed PHP Version(s) 

PHP 8.0

## SAPIs Impacted 

None.

## Impact to Existing Extensions 

See Backward Incompatible Changes

## php.ini Defaults 

None.

## Open Issues 

None yet.


## Future Scope

A previous version of this RFC included support for autoloading constants and streams. These have been excluded from this RFC for the following reasons.

### Constant autoloading

Although it would be possible to add constant autoloading, the position of this RFC is that being unable to directly reference [functions by name](https://github.com/Danack/RfcCodex/blob/master/referencing_functions.md) is a more important problem to address.

If we added constant autoloading now, that would have a very high chance of limiting the choices surrounding being able to reference functions. Because of that, this RFC does not include constant autoloading.

### Stream autoloading

Stream autoloading is excluded from this RFC to reduce the size of the RFC. It would be possible to add it in a later version.


### Other types

Imagine when PHP supports enums, and we want to use those as parameter type:

```

enum Compass {
  North, South, East, West 
}

function foo(Compass $direction) { ... }

foo(Compass::East);

```

This should be possible to add to the type autoloading.


## Patches and Tests 

A patch will be created shortly

## References 

  * Importing namespaces: http://php.net/manual/en/language.namespaces.importing.php
  * SPL Autoloading: http://php.net/manual/en/language.oop5.autoload.php

## Rejected Features 

- None.

## Vote

Commit message:

Added notes for previous work.

2_autoloading_part_2.md, after:

# PHP RFC: Function Autoloading 

  * Version: 0.5
  * Date: 2020-05-09
  * Author: Danack, based on work Anthony Ferrara
  * Status: Draft
  * First Published at: 

## Introduction 

This RFC proposes a new unified autoloading mechanism to allow autoloading of class types (which includes classes, interfaces and traits), callable types, and functions. Currently only class type autoloading is possible in PHP

## Example

This example shows a separate autoloader being registered for classes, 

```php

<?php

use function PHP\autoload_register;
use const PHP\AUTOLOAD_TYPE;
use const PHP\AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION;


function classTypeAutoloader($name, $type)
{
    if ($type !== AUTOLOAD_TYPE) {
        return;
    }
    if ($name !== 'foo') {
        return;
    }

    // Being able to define classes inside a function
    // already exists in PHP and is convenient for an example 
    class foo
    {
        public function __construct()
        {
            echo "class was created";
        } 
    }
}

function functionAutoloader($name, $type)
{
    if ($type !== AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION) {
        return;
    }
    if ($name !== 'foo') {
        return;
    }
    function foo() {
        echo "foo was called";
    }
}

function callableTypeAutoloader($name, $type)
{
    if ($type !== AUTOLOAD_TYPE) {
        return;
    }
    if ($name !== 'logger') {
        return;
    }

    typedef logger = callable(string $message): void;
}

autoload_register('classTypeAutoloader', AUTOLOAD_TYPE);
autoload_register('callableTypeAutoloader', AUTOLOAD_TYPE);
autoload_register('functionAutoloader', AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION);

// As is currently possible, trigger class autoload 
new Foo();
//output: class was created

// The triggers the capability to autoload a function 
foo();
// output: function was autoloaded and called


// Define a function that uses a callable type for a paramter
// This does not trigger an autoload event. The autoloading happens
// When the function is called.
function usesCallableType(logger $logger)
{
    $logger("usesCallableType was called");
}

$echoLogger = function (string $message)
{
    echo $message . "\n";
};

// When this function is dispatched, it is during the type  
// checking that the 'logger' callable type is autoloaded
usesCallableType($echoLogger);

```

## Implementation details

### Constants 

This proposal registers the following constants:

  * PHP\AUTOLOAD_TYPE => 1
  * PHP\AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION => 2


The `AUTOLOAD_TYPE` is used for registering autoloaders for all the different types, which will be classes and callable types.

The `AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION` is used for registering autoloading for functions.


### Userland Functions 

This proposal adds the following functions:

#### bool php\autoload_register(callable $callback, int $type, bool $prepend) 


#### bool php\autoload_unregister(callable $callback, int $type) 

This function behaves similar to the current //spl_autoload_unregister// function, and unregisters a callback that was previously registered. Note that if you registered the same callback for multiple types, this will unregister all of them unless the //$type// argument is specified.

#### array php\autoload_list(int $type) 

This function will return a list of all registered autoloaders for a specific type.

#### function_exists() 

A new optional boolean argument is added to `function_exists()` to match the behavior of `class_exists()` when it comes to autoloading functions.

TODO - an optional argument seems sub-optimal. Should we simply add a new function that does function_load() ?

### Behavior 

Registering autoloaders with the new API will allow callbacks to be fired on type and function missing errors.

#### Single Type Behavior 

By passing a single constant to the register function, the callback will only be called for types that match (the `$type` parameter is still set, but will never vary).

<file php single_type.php>
<?php
php\autoload_register(function($name, $type) {
    var_dump($name, $type);
    eval("function $name(){}");
    // We don't need a switch, since we only register for functions.
}, php\AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION);
foo(); // string(3) "foo" int(2)
new foo(); // FATAL_ERROR as no autoloader is registered
?>
</file>

#### Multiple Type Behavior 

By passing a bitwise-or'd constant to the register function, the callback will only be called for types that match).

<file php multiple_type.php>
<?php
php\autoload_register(function($name, $type) {
    var_dump($name, $type);
    switch ($type) {
        case php\AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION:
            eval("function $name(){}");
            break;
        case php\AUTOLOAD_TYPE:
            $code = <<< CODE
            class $name
                {
                    public function __construct()
                    {
                        echo "class $name was created";
                    } 
                }
CODE;
            eval($code);
            break;
    }
}, php\AUTOLOAD_FUNCTION | php\AUTOLOAD_TYPE);
foo(); // string(3) "foo" int(2)
new foo();
?>
</file>


### Userland Backwards Compatibility 

#### SPL 

This RFC proposes to strip the current //spl_autoload_register// functionality, and make //spl_autoload_*// simple proxies for registering core autoloaders. They will function exactly as they do now, but under the hood they will be using the new interface.

This means that calls to //spl_autoload_functions()// will include any autoloader (which indicates support for //php\AUTOLOAD_TYPE  //) registered through //php\autoload_register()//. However, all autoloaders registered via //spl_autoload_register// will set the //pass_type// flag to //0//, meaning that only a single argument will be passed to the callback. This is for compatiblity.


### C API Backwards Compatibility 

#### SPL 

The autoload related SPL globals have been removed, due to the implementation being centralized.

## Backward Incompatible Changes 

### Userland 

There should be no user-land BC changes.

### PECL 

#### EG(autoload_func) 

PECL extensions which rely on the //EG(autoload_func)// global variable will break (due to refactor).

A quick scan of LXR shows that only the [optimizer](http://lxr.php.net/xref/PECL/optimizer/optimize.c#4660) extension would change.

#### autoload_func_info 

PECL extensions which reply on the SPL type //autoload_func_info// will break (due to refactor).

A quick scan of LXR shows that no extensions use this.

#### SPL_G(autoload_functions) 

PECL extensions which rely on the SPL globals will break (due to refactor).

A quick scan of LXR shows that no extensions use this.

## Proposed PHP Version(s) 

PHP 8.0

## SAPIs Impacted 

None.

## Impact to Existing Extensions 

See Backward Incompatible Changes

## php.ini Defaults 

None.

## Open Issues 

None yet.


## Future Scope

A previous version of this RFC included support for autoloading constants and streams. These have been excluded from this RFC for the following reasons.

### Constant autoloading

Although it would be possible to add constant autoloading, the position of this RFC is that being unable to directly reference [functions by name](https://github.com/Danack/RfcCodex/blob/master/referencing_functions.md) is a more important problem to address.

If we added constant autoloading now, that would have a very high chance of limiting the choices surrounding being able to reference functions. Because of that, this RFC does not include constant autoloading.

### Stream autoloading

Stream autoloading is excluded from this RFC to reduce the size of the RFC. It would be possible to add it in a later version.


### Other types

Imagine when PHP supports enums, and we want to use those as parameter type:

```

enum Compass {
  North, South, East, West 
}

function foo(Compass $direction) { ... }

foo(Compass::East);

```

This should be possible to add to the type autoloading.


## Patches and Tests 

A patch will be created shortly

## References 

  * Importing namespaces: http://php.net/manual/en/language.namespaces.importing.php
  * SPL Autoloading: http://php.net/manual/en/language.oop5.autoload.php

## Rejected Features 

- None.

## Vote 



Previous RFC for function autoloading:
https://wiki.php.net/rfc/function_autoloading

Pull-request:
https://github.com/ircmaxell/php-src/tree/function-autoloading-7
